Policy on Raising Concerns about Executive Director Conduct

Any concerns related to violations of law, ECC policy, or the contractual obligations of the clubhouse, should be addressed using the grievance and/or whistleblower policies. This concern policy applies to issues related to the conduct of the executive director that are not otherwise covered by the those policies. The ECC will not retaliate against anyone who, in good faith, follows this policy to raise a concern about some practice of the ECC or its executive director.

When conflict arises, direct communication should be preferred to indirect communication and anyone bringing concerns under this policy should first raise their concerns directly with the executive director.

In accordance with its bylaws and policies, the board shall review the executive director's performance periodically. This periodic review is the standard process through which non-grievance concerns about the executive director's conduct are shared with and reviewed by the board. In the event an issue arises related to the executive director's conduct that the concerned individual
  1. can't resolve through direct communication with the executive director and
  2. believes must be addressed more directly than the standard executive director review process allows
this concern process may be used.

Anyone can submit a concern about the conduct of the executive director, in writing, to any member of the board. The written concern should be specific in its documentation, attempting to answer such questions as who, what, when, where, and how. The board member who receives this concern will share it in a timely manner (no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board) with the executive director and at least two other members of the board. If any board member believes the concern merits additional follow-up beyond the standard executive director review process, that board member may ask the board to convene a listening committee. If any board member believes the concern rises to the standards covered by the grievance policy, the board will handle it as such, with the grievance policy superseding this policy.

The listening committee may only contain members of the ECC board, must have at least two people, and will not include the executive director. When meeting with the concerned individual, the role of the listening committee is to listen and clarify the concern, not to mediate or otherwise take a position. To that end, the board shall delegate none of its decision-making powers to the listening committee. When meeting with the listening committee, the person bringing the concern may elect to have a witness present and anyone may elect to have an interpreter, which the ECC will provide.

After meeting with the concerned individual, the listening committee will consult with the executive director. The listening committee will then report on the concern and subsequent listening process, in a timely manner, to the full board. At this point, the board can decide what further action(s), if any, to take.