Policy on Grievances to the Board

A grievance process is fundamentally adversarial and, as such, non-adversarial mechanisms for addressing concerns, if available, should be explored first. Any person may submit a grievance in writing to the board. The grievance should be specific in its documentation, attempting to answer such questions as who, what, when, where, and how. The ECC will not retaliate against anyone who, in good faith, follows this policy to raise a concern.

In order to be a grievance there should be an alleged violation of at least one of the following:
  1. Law
  2. ECC policy
  3. A contractual obligation of the clubhouse

If none of the above criteria have been met, the Policy on Raising Concerns about Executive Director Conduct may apply.
If the Policy on Raising Concerns about Executive Director Conduct does not apply, the issue should be raised with the Executive Director or other staff instead of being brought directly to the board.

At any time the board may convene a subcommittee of at least three board members to address a grievance. 

Grievance Process:
  1. The board, upon receiving a grievance, may form a subcommittee to handle that grievance. If the grievance is against one or more members of the board, and those members constitute less than one third of the total current membership of the board, those members of the board may not participate in the grievance process except as parties against whom a grievance has been filed and do not count as members of the full board for the duration of this process. At any time any member of this subcommittee may dissolve the subcommittee in order to have the full board handle the grievance process. 
  2. The board (or its designated subcommittee) will evaluate if the grievance meets the criteria for a grievance. If the criteria are not met, the board will communicate in writing to the party who submitted the grievance why the grievance policy does not apply.
  3. If the board (or its designated subcommittee) believes the grievance merits additional investigation, they will inform all parties to the grievance of the grievance and provide all parties to the grievance with the full contents of the grievance. All parties to the grievance will also be provided with a copy of this policy in writing. Because of the open and transparent nature of this process, the whole ECC must be diligent and pro-active in enforcing non-retaliation.
  4. Before a decision can be rendered against a party or any recommendations or consequences administered, the board (or its designated subcommittee) will make every effort to provide an opportunity for the potentially affected party to meet with the board (or its designated subcommittee) to share their perspectives, answer questions, and provide additional evidence. In any meeting with the board (or its designated subcommittee), any party may bring a witness or legal representation. Interpretation services, if requested, will be provided by the ECC. These meetings may be recorded and minutes will be taken. These minutes will be sent to all parties to the grievance in writing following the meeting. If any party to the meeting has concerns about the accuracy of these minutes as an account of what happened in the meeting, they may provide corrections in writing in a timely manner and those will similarly be distributed and appended to the minutes.
  5. Once the board (or its designated subcommittee) have decided that the grievance meets the criteria to be a grievance, only the full board can render final judgment. Any consequences as a result of the grievance will require 2/3 votes of the full board, rather than consensus. Any consequences or recommendations will then be presented in writing by the board to the parties those consequences or recommendations apply to. All parties to the grievance will then be notified in writing that the board has concluded its grievance process. The full board may, by consensus, decide to share one or more outcomes of the grievance process with the party that filed the grievance, but is not obligated to do so.

Absent substantial new information or evidence of dishonesty in the original grievance process, parties will not be subject to subsequent grievance processes for the same underlying combination of event and violation. Multiple grievances filed in close proximity for the same underlying event and violation may be rolled into a single grievance process where parties to the individual grievances remain parties in the consolidated grievance process. Should grievances be consolidated into a single process, each party who filed a grievance will be made aware of each other party who filed a grievance that was consolidated with theirs. If the board declines to proceed with a grievance because they believe it is for the same underlying combination of event and violation as a grievance that's already been closed, they will communicate that in writing to the party who filed the new grievance.

All grievances and corresponding minutes will be kept on file in a secure and confidential location in accordance with the Record Retention Policy.