A Clubhouse for Elkhart County
Bylaws

1. Identity
	The vision of Elkhart County Clubhouse (hereafter ECC) is to be a community of recovery, hope, and dignity that empowers people with mental illness through friendship, meaningful work, and cultivation of strengths, building on the clubhouse model and standards formulated by the International Center for Clubhouse Development.

2. Board of Directors
	A. Composition
		The board of directors will consist of 8-12 board members (the number subject to change by board resolution), elected by the board to staggered 3-year terms. Board members are limited to two successive terms unless the board by a 2/3 vote requests that an individual board member serve an additional term. Serving at least 18 months of a term counts as serving a term for purposes of this term limit. After being off the board for at least one year, former board members may be reappointed to the board. In selecting members the board will focus on how prospective members will further the vision of the ECC, on having the board as a whole reflect the diversity of the community, and on maintaining connection with other related community groups. The board may further define board selection and review processes in policies.

	B. Board meetings
		The procedures outlined below are designed to allow for expedient decision-making while protecting the voices of all board members in the process. Procedural maneuvers should not be used to sideline or silence other board members.
			
			i.Regular meetings
				The board shall adopt a schedule of regular meetings (at least quarterly). This schedule can only be modified at a regular meeting of the board (by consensus), and changes in schedule require at least twenty days written (or e-mail) notice to board members not present. Those present at a regular board meeting constitute a quorum. Any non-consensus agenda items for regular meetings (e.g., bylaws amendments, removal of Executive Director, removal of board member), must be announced to board members in writing at least one week prior to the meeting. This and all notification requirements can be waived by unanimous consent of all members of the board (in person or in writing).

			ii.Special meetings
				Special meetings of the board can be called by three members of the board, or by the Executive Director acting alone (not more than once a quarter if called by the Executive Director alone), and require a one-week written notice (except by unanimous consent of all board members). Special meetings require the presence of the Executive Director (except when the only announced agenda is disciplinary action against the Executive Director), and 2/3 of board members for a quorum. (The Executive Director may, if he/she cannot attend a special meeting, permit the meeting to proceed without his/her presence.) All agenda items for special meetings must be stipulated when the meeting is called and announced along with the meeting time and place. Meeting times and places shall be designed to maximize participation within necessary time constraints of urgent agenda.

			iii.Decisions without meetings
				With the unanimous consent of all board members, the board can make a decision without a meeting. The consent to such decision shall be confirmed in writing.

			iv.Remote participation
				Although face to face deliberation is preferred, if a member of the board cannot attend a meeting the board will allow them to participate from another location.

			v.Decision-making
				The board will take counsel together and make decisions by consensus. In this context consensus means that no decision will be made until all members in attendance are willing to proceed and can live with the proposed decision. The following are exempt from consensus requirements, but require a two/thirds majority:

					a. A decision to remove from office or sanction the executive director
					b. A decision to remove from office or sanction a board member
					c. A resolution to change the composition of the committee empowered to act in extreme measures, outlined in 2.D.below.
					d. A decision to amend the bylaws (see later section on bylaws amendment)

				Although these decisions do not requiring consensus, the board should endeavor to fashion a process of careful listening and discernment, so that even these decisions reflectvalues of respect and inclusive decision-making.

	C. Minutes
		The board shall maintain a record of its actions and any other matters it wishes to record. 

	D. Extreme measures
		
		i.If at least half of the elected board members feel the board is at an impasse that jeopardizes the future of the ECC, they may avail themselves of a safety net provision. 

		ii.When this provision is invoked, all board members shall immediately cease to serve, and a committee of three outside people (Andy Wilson, Jack Yatsko, and a third person of Andy and Jack’s choosing) shall be empowered to appoint replacement board members to serve out the remainder of any and all dismissed board members terms within these bylaws. 

		iii.These new board appointees may include previous board members, appointed to complete the terms to which they had previously been elected. 

		iv.All new board members shall be appointed with a view to reestablishing a vision-driven governance structure for the ECC. 

		v.The composition of the committee of three outside people empowered to act under such circumstances may be changed by board resolution, adopted by a two-thirds vote. 

		vi.If stipulated members of this outside committee are unable or unwilling to serve in this capacity, or if the board has otherwise failed to clarify or make provision for the appointment of members of this committee, the Executive Director of the ICCD shall be empowered to name committee members.

		vii.This provision should not be invoked lightly, and all efforts to resolve matters short of this measure (including seeking outside help and/or mediation) should be explored prior to such action. 

	E. Board PrerogativesThe board shall retain for itself the following prerogatives:

		i.The appointment and dismissal of board members

		ii.The appointment and dismissal of the Executive Director

		iii.The adoption of a budget and fiscal oversight of the ECC

		iv.The adoption of such major policies as it chooses

		v.The evaluation of the Executive Director

		vi.The evaluation of board members and of the board as a whole

		vii.The adoption of amendments to the bylaws

		The board shall be accountable for how it exercises these prerogatives; with openness and transparency it will communicate its actions and its self-evaluation with members of the ECC, members of the staff, and the broader community of ECC support. The board will also provide opportunities to hear feedback directly from this broader community.

	F. Committees:
		Temporary or standing committees may be appointed to address board or administrative agenda. These may include a wide variety of community members who need not be ECC or board members. Committee members shall be appointed to meet the tasks assigned the committee. When committees are formed it shall be stipulated what tasks they are to perform, whether they are advisory or exercise delegated authority, whether they are temporary or standing, if temporary for how long, terms of committee member appointments, how the committee is to be composed, and to whom the committee reports and is accountable. 

		Committees that address board matters (e.g., nominations, board review) shall be appointed by the board with the advice and consent of the Executive Director. 

		Administrative committees (e.g., transitional employment, fundraising) shall be appointed by the Executive Director with the advice and consent of the board.

	G. Officers:
		The board will function in an inclusive circle model. However, pro forma officers may be appointed as needed for the limited purpose of meeting contractual or other outside obligations.

3. Executive Director
	The board shall appoint an Executive Director and delegate to him/her the responsibilities of the day-to-day operations of the ECC. 

	A. Appointment
		The Executive Director shall be appointed by the board, and the appointment shall require consensus. The board shall seek broad input and counsel in the appointment process, and may adopt policies to assure good process.

	B. Function
		The Executive Director is expected to model the vision of the ECC in his/her relationships with ECC members, staff, and the board. The Executive Director shall have the authority necessary to carry out the responsibilities of managing the ECC (including the hiring of additional staff) within these bylaws and the budget and policies adopted by the board.

	C. Relationship to board
		The Executive Director shall be an ex officio member of the board and shall routinely meet with the board and be part of its deliberations and consensus. On matters exempt from consensus decision-making, the Executive Director shall have a vote in action to remove or sanction a board member, and in the adoption of amendments to the bylaws. He/she has no vote in matters regarding the removal or sanctioning of the Executive Director or in action to dissolve and reform the board, outlined in section 2.D. above.

	D. Accountability
		The Executive Director is accountable to the board for carrying out the program of the ECC within the policies and budget adopted by the board. The board shall initiate and oversee an evaluation of the Executive Director annually and shall adopt policies that ensure a constructive and inclusive process.

4. Amendment of Bylaws
	Amendments to these bylaws may be adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of the board at any meeting of the board at which a quorum is present, board members having been advised in writing at least one week prior to the meeting of all proposed amendments to the bylaws. This and all notification requirements can be waived by unanimous consent of all members of the board, confirmed in writing, but care should be taken to assure that all board members have sufficient time to study and consider any proposed amendments to the bylaws prior to adoption.

5. General Good Governance/Not-for-profit Principles
	A. Non-Discrimination
		The Board shall adopt a policy on non-discrimination.

	B. Grievances
		The Board shall adopt a policy which establishes a grievance procedure.

	C. Conflicts of Interest
		The Board shall adopt a policy to address the disclosure of potential conflicts of interest and how they shall be addressed.

	D. Disposal of resources if corporation dissolves (as also stipulated in the Articles of Incorporation)
		Upon the dissolution of the Corporation, assets shall be distributed for one or more exempt purposes within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or corresponding section of any future Federal tax code. However, if the named recipient is not then in existence or no longer a qualified distribute, or unwilling or unable to accept the distribution, then the assets of this Corporation shall be distributed to a fund, foundation, or corporation organized and operated exclusively for the purposes specified in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or corresponding section of any future Federal tax code.
