Policy on Paid Time Off and Leaves of Absence

Paid Time Off - All Elkhart County Clubhouse employees accrue one day of Paid Time Off (PTO) for every two weeks of employment. Employees are expected to use PTO for vacations, breaks, and minor (brief) illnesses. Upon termination of employment, unused PTO days will be paid.

Leaves of absence - Employees may on occasion need to be absent from work for a short or an extended period of time. In order to encourage long-term employment, ECC may grant a leave of absence in the following situations, if staffing needs of the organization can be met in the employee’s absence. Leaves may be paid or unpaid, depending on the circumstances. In some cases, some verification may be requested.

Funeral leave - When there is a death in an employee’s immediate family, he/she may receive up to three days of paid leave. An immediate family member is here defined as the employee’s or employee’s partner’s child, parent, sibling, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandchild, or grandparent. If additional time is needed for travel, etc., the employee may use PTO or may request unpaid leave.

Medical leave - Employees may request a medical leave of absence for 
	(1) a serious health condition that renders them unable to perform their duties
	(2) an elective procedure that requires time off or 
	(3) care of an immediate family member who is ill. 
Medical leave will be unpaid unless we determine that there are exceptional and compelling reasons for paid leave. During unpaid leave we will continue to pay the health supplement.

Industrial leave - Paid industrial leave will be granted to an employee who is unable to work because of a work-related injury. An injury is considered work-related if the employee promptly informs the supervisor of the injury in the workplace, and if the worker’s compensationclaim is accepted.

Parental leave - Parental leave is available for a new parent (including adoptive parent of a child under the age of six) beginning eight months after the start of employment unless other arrangements have been made at the time of employment. A new parent is eligible for four weeks of paid leave at full pay, including the health supplement, any amount for student loan repayment, and our employer contribution toward retirement. A new parent is also eligible for up to four months of unpaid leave. During unpaid leave we will continue to pay the health supplement.

Personal leave - Employees who have worked at ECC for at least three months may request personal leave. Personal leave will be unpaid unless we determine that there are exceptional and compelling reasons for paid leave. Personal leaves may be approved for up to thirty days a year. During unpaid leave we will continue to pay the health supplement.